doc/markdown/hypro.md, before:

HyPro {#mainpage}
==========

[TOC]

This is the documentation of HyPro, a C++ library for state set representations tailored for the analysis of hybrid automata. Information regarding the dependencies as well as installation can be found in the [getting started section](@ref gettingStarted) as well as a general information about the usage of the library.

Further information about the theoretical background of the library can be found in the section [state set representations](@ref stateSets) and its subpages. There we present the general interface all provided state set representations implement as well as show examples on how to use the library.

Additional features implemented in HyPro are presented in the section [Features](@ref features).

Information about the provided [utility functions](@ref utilFunc) can be found in the corresponding section.

Section [examples](@ref examples) gives a short description about the available examples shipped with HyPro and their intention.

A small (growing) collection of [tutorials](@ref tutorials) shows how to use the library.

### Contact

Please note that this documentation is under construction - if you have requests or further questions, please do not hesitate to contact us on github:

github: https://github.com/hypro/hypro

Commit message:

add developers guide
Signed-off-by: Stefan Schupp <stefan.schupp@tuwien.ac.at>

doc/markdown/hypro.md, after:

HyPro {#mainpage}
==========

[TOC]

This is the documentation of HyPro, a C++ library for state set representations tailored for the analysis of hybrid automata. Information regarding the dependencies as well as installation can be found in the [getting started section](@ref gettingStarted) as well as a general information about the usage of the library.

Further information about the theoretical background of the library can be found in the section [state set representations](@ref stateSets) and its subpages. There we present the general interface all provided state set representations implement as well as show examples on how to use the library.

Additional features implemented in HyPro are presented in the section [Features](@ref features).
Information about the provided [utility functions](@ref utilFunc) can be found in the corresponding section.

Section [examples](@ref examples) gives a short description about the available examples shipped with HyPro and their
intention.

A small (growing) collection of [tutorials](@ref tutorials) shows how to use the library. If you want to participate,
the [developer's guide](@ref developer) is a good starting point.

### Contact

Please note that this documentation is under construction - if you have requests or further questions, please do not hesitate to contact us on github:

github: https://github.com/hypro/hypro
